NGF: document NginxProxy useClusterIP setting (#2116)
nginx/documentation: content/ngf/how-to/data-plane-configuration.md

---

## Route upstream traffic to the Service ClusterIP

> By default, NGINX Gateway Fabric resolves each backend Service to its individual Pod IPs and uses those as the upstream servers. This means that every time the backend Pods change (for example, during a scale up, scale down, or rollout), NGINX must reload to pick up the new set of endpoints.

Reviewer: I wonder if we mention the ability to do this per upstream with the UpstreamSettingsPolicy, while also mentioning the global way to do it.

Author: Good idea. Added a sentence noting that useClusterIP can be set globally via NginxProxy or per-Service via an UpstreamSettingsPolicy (which takes precedence), with a link to the UpstreamSettingsPolicy doc.

One thing I noticed: the UpstreamSettingsPolicy page itself does not yet document its useClusterIP field (it covers zoneSize, loadBalancingMethod, and keepAlive). I can open a separate PR to add that if you agree.

{{< call-out "note" >}} Because the upstream contains only the Service VIP as a single server, you lose NGINX's load balancing across the backend Pods. Traffic is instead load balanced by the Kubernetes Service (kube-proxy), so NGINX load balancing settings such as those in an `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` no longer apply to that Service. {{< /call-out >}}

The following command creates an `NginxProxy` resource that enables `useClusterIP`:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.nginx.org/v1alpha2
kind: NginxProxy
metadata:
  name: ngf-proxy-config
spec:
  useClusterIP: true
EOF
```

`useClusterIP` applies only when the target Service has a ClusterIP. The following cases fall back to the default Pod IP resolution:

- Headless Services (`ClusterIP: None`).
- ExternalName Services.

> - Layer 4 (TCPRoute/UDPRoute) stream upstreams, which are not affected by this setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`useClusterIP` applies only when the target Service has a ClusterIP. The following cases fall back to the default Pod IP resolution:
- Headless Services (ClusterIP: None).
- ExternalName Services.

Layer 4 (TCPRoute/UDPRoute) stream upstreams are unaffected by this setting, since it does not apply to L4 traffic.
```

Author: @salonichf5 - applied the suggestion, you can merge it now
